title: A Sixth Pattern for Safe Javascript Object Traversal
published: !!timestamp '2014-05-14 11:00:00'
active_page: blog
tags:
    - javascript
    - programming

Perhaps, like [many](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/10918488/testing-nested-objects-as-undefined-in-javascript]) [others](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/2631001/javascript-test-for-existence-of-nested-object-key), you've also run into TypeErrors when accessing deeply nested properties in Javascript objects?


If not, consider a nested object like,

<pre class="prettyprint">
obj = {
  event: {
    location: {
      place: {
        name: 'Friday Harbor'
      }
    }
  }
}
</pre>

Access the nested `name` in the naive way looks like this:

<pre class="prettyprint">
obj.event.location.place.name
</pre>

Unfortunately, we get a TypeError if any of the fields are `null` or `undefined`.

So far, I've found five techniques to deal with this situation. If that weren't enough, I'll add a sixth at the end that I find really nice.

First, the basics,

(1) Nested property existence checking
---

<pre class="prettyprint">
var name;
if (obj && 
    obj.event && 
    obj.event.location && 
    obj.event.location.place) {
  name = obj.event.location.place.name;
}
</pre>

For looking only one or two levels deep, this approach isn't so bad, though the repetition it cumbersome.

(2) Use a try/catch block
---

<pre class="prettyprint">
var name;
try {
  name = obj.event.location.place.name;
} catch (e) {
  name = 'name not found';
}
</pre>

Pretty good, but wrapping things in a `try/catch` block is annoying if we want to do an object lookup inline. For example, if we were trying to replace the following code,

<pre class="prettyprint">
$('#name').text(obj.event.location.place.name);
</pre>

We would need to do the lookup first and store it in a local variable,

<pre class="prettyprint">
var name;
try {
  name = obj.event.location.place.name;
} catch (e) {
  name = 'name not found';
}
$('#name').text(name);
</pre>

Not bad, but can we do better? Do we really need to do error checking? Quite a few techniques go down this road...

(3) Create a path lookup syntax
---

A path lookup looks like [some](https://gist.github.com/furf/3208381) [variation](https://github.com/chaijs/pathval) of the following,


<pre class="prettyprint">
path(obj, 'event.location.place.name');
// returns undefined if fails
</pre>

This works ok unless you have a property with a `.` in it. One implementation ([SteelToe](https://github.com/jclem/steeltoe)) could handle this:

<pre class="prettyprint">
SteelToe(obj)('event')('location')('place')('name')
</pre>

Our example that tested the `try/catch` pattern looks much nicer now:

<pre class="prettyprint">
$('#name').text(path(obj, 'event.location.place.name'));
</pre>

Unfortunately, now we've introduced a new API for object traversal. Introducing new APIs for fundamental operations has to be done carefully, and I think path lookups don't quite strike the balance.

(4) cheap monads
---

From [Oliver Steele's blog](http://blog.osteele.com/posts/2007/12/cheap-monads), back in 2007:

<pre class="prettyprint">
var name = 
  ((((obj||{}).event||{}).location||{}).place||{}).name;
</pre>

This is a cool pattern which removes the repetition of `obj.` in the first method. However, it's also kind of an awkward idiom (in my opinion), requiring weird paren balancing.

(5) Monad.js
---

Why settle for cheap monads when we just just [attempt to simulate them completely](https://github.com/chrislewis/monad.js)?!

An interesting attempt to create an `either` construct that we can use to wrap the unsafe traversal operation. Unfortunately, getting our value out of the monad isn't so pretty.

<pre class="prettyprint">
var unsafe_name = function () { 
  return obj.event.location.place.name; 
}
var safe_name = monad.eitherEx(unsafe_name);
var name = safe_name.fold(
  function (error) {
    return 'some default value';
  },
  function (name) {
    return name;
  }
);
</pre>

(6) `soak`
---

While option (5), Monad.js, looks like the worst of all, it got me thinking along an interesting line. The heart of the pattern is wrapping an unsafe operation in a function. Let's try a variation on this idea.

Let's say that I just want to soak up the error after a failed function call and return some default value. Well, that isn't too hard to do:
  
<pre class="prettyprint">
function soak (f, otherwise) {
  try {
    return f();
  } catch (e) {
    return otherwise;
  }
}
</pre>

If `f()` produces an error, the function returns the provided default value. Otherwise, it just returns `f()`.
  
We can make it a bit more capable by optionally calling `otherwise` if it happens to be a function:

<pre class="prettyprint">  
function soak (f, otherwise) {
  try {
    return f();
  } catch (e) {
    return _.result(otherwise);
  }
}
</pre>

([`_.result`](http://underscorejs.org/#result))

Now safely traversing an object is easy. We just wrap our dangerous traversal in a function and soak up any error it might produce:

<pre class="prettyprint"> 
var getName = function () { 
  return obj.event.location.place.name; 
}
var name = soak(getName, 'not found');
</pre>

This is nice, but what if we could wrap `soak` around a function to make it safe against errors. It would look something like this...

<pre class="prettyprint"> 
var getName = soak(function () { 
  return obj.event.location.place.name; 
}, 'some default value');
var name = getName();
</pre>

Let's implement it:

<pre class="prettyprint">  
function soak (f, otherwise) {  
  return function () {
    try {
      return f.apply(this, arguments);
    } catch (e) {
      return _.result(otherwise);
    }
  };
}
</pre>

Now we we're good to go, even able to pass parameters to our soaked function as if nothing were out of the ordinary:

<pre class="prettyprint">  
var appreciateName = soak(function (appreciation) { 
  return obj.event.location.place.name + appreciation; 
}, 'some default value');
var name = appreciateName(" :)");
</pre>



We can compose our new function like any other. In the [first linked SO article](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/10918488/testing-nested-objects-as-undefined-in-javascript), a backup lookup is tried if the first lookup fails. Here is the tangle of code:

<pre class="prettyprint">  
if (formsetName && 
  _.isUndefined(this.model.errors[formsetName][fieldName]) != true) {
    $(fieldError).text(this.model.errors[formsetname][fieldName]);
} else if (
  typeof this.model.errors[fieldName] != "undefined"){
    $(fieldError).text(this.model.errors[fieldName]);
}
</pre>

We can refactor it with nested `soak` calls:

<pre class="prettyprint">  
var that = this;
var getErrorText = soak(function () {
  return that.model.errors[formsetname][fieldName];
}, soak(function () {
  return that.model.errors[fieldName];
}, 'no error found'));

$(fieldError).text(getErrorText());
</pre>

The code here is just as dense as the previous, but it falls apart at the slightest touch. Most of the noise is creating anonymous functions, a syntax your brain ignores after working with Javascript for some time. The `return` statements stand out, putting the behavior of the function up front. Also, unlike quite a number of the above techniques, we get to use our familiar dot notation.

This, then, is why I like `soak`: it leans on Javascript as a functional language.