title: Macbook Air Battery Life
published: !!timestamp '2013-10-23 10:00:00'
active_page: blog
tags:
    - osx
    - ux
    
John Siracusa's [monster OS X upgrade review](http://arstechnica.com/apple/2013/10/os-x-10-9/18/) just landed, and it doesn't disappoint.

The most important new change for me is battery life. Sounds boring, right?

> And yet we all find big increases in battery life attractive, sometimes even revelatory, once we experience them. New MacBook Air owners have been giddily posting pictures of their battery status menu and explaining how it has changed their habits and, in some tiny way, their lives.

For me, better battery life means better communication. 

I may a design meeting in the morning, coffee in the afternoon, then a work session in the evening. Inevitably, a chance meeting will happen in between.

Conversations tend to take place in places where it's hard to find a power source. Even if it isn't, searching for an adapter and tethering yourself to it reduces the spontaneity and smoothness of the encounter. If you don't have a reliable day's battery life, you'll be estimating constantly if it's worth taking out your computer for a demo.

How much of the success and failure of a software project is determined by the communication between client and developer? 

I've found even just small improvements in communication have dramatic impacts on the joy and success of software projects. So, for me, better battery life translates to joy and success.

I hit upgrade right away.
